We're being optimistic
today with optimistic UI.
And the UI we want to be optimistic
about is this piece, the deposits.
So even if the user is on a slow network,
I want to be able to submit this
deposit and have it appear instantly.
We also actually will clear the form and
we'll improve that in
the next exercise as well.
But we're gonna just add query in
the form when the request is ultimately
successful as well.
So we're in the invoice ID route and
there's the deposit form right
around here, and this deposit form,
when the user submits this form,
this fetcher is going to have
that submission data on it.
So we actually know everything
we need to display that
information that the user is gonna get.
Sometimes you can't really do this because
sometimes what the user is creating and
there's gonna be some sort of calculation
that happens on the back end.
And like, for example,
the Consent Podcast,
I can't optimistically display the final
episode because they're on the back end,
we're actually stitching together the two
pieces, so I can't do that in the client.
So sometimes you cannot do optimistic UI.
But in this case, we have everything
we need to display the optimistic UI.
And in those cases where it
doesn't feel like you can,
you might be able to still because you can
show just like a little skeleton UI for
the piece of data that you don't have yet.
We'll actually look at
skeleton UIs later today.
So for this, we just need to find out
what was it that the user submitted,
and then add it into the list
of deposits that we render.
So that is what we're
going to be doing here.
Instead of using data dot deposits,
I'm actually going to
create a new deposits variable,
data dot deposits, so
now we can just swap this in both
of these places for just deposits.
As a straight up refactor,
nothing useful going on there
until I make a copy of this,
because I'm actually going to mutate this.
I don't want to mutate something that's
coming from I use loader data or
use date or any of that stuff,
we're not gonna mutate that.
But variables that I create,
sure I'll mutate that all day long, and
so that's what we're gonna do is we're
going to say, hey new deposit fetcher,
do you have a submission
with a valid deposit,
let's just add one of those to
the deposits that we're entering.
Now that works out nicely.
You wouldn't have to do it this way, you
could actually leave it the way it was,
and then just go down to
the bottom of the deposits and
add another one like
that if you wanted to.
I just find this to be a lot easier.
So what we need to do is find out
whether there is a submission going
on that has the data that we need for
a deposit.
So I'm gonna say if new deposit
fetcher dot submission,
if it's been submitted then,
yeah sort of, thanks copilot.
Not quite though, so
we are going to push and
we need to have a couple things on here.
We're gonna have an ID.
The problem with the ID is that
that is generated by the back end.
So the user didn't give that to us.
The nice thing is, we actually don't care.
We don't display the ID or
anything like that.
We actually do use it in the link, and
there are a couple of ideas
you could do with that.
You could just have it link to nowhere or
whatever.
Hopefully the idea is that we're just
trying to be a little extra helpful to
the user and this is a situation that
is hopefully sort of unusual for
the user to look at this for
too long of a period.
But you could have it
linked to a page that says,
wow you're really fast,
congratulations, or whatever.
But what I'm going to do
is just set this to new.
And the only situation where
this would actually be
a problem aside from linking to
deposit that doesn't exist yet
is if the user submits a bunch of these,
we actually use the ID as the key.
And so React is gonna be like I
don't know what to do about this,
probably would actually be okay but yeah,
you may wanna generate this if you want it
to really be resilient to issues there.
So we need to set the ID,
we also need to set the amount and
that is going to be new deposit fetcher
dot submission dot form data get amount.
So the amount that the user submitted,
we know that that is how we
get that out of the submission
because if we go down to our form,
we have the input that the user
is using has a name amount.
So that's how we know, that's what we're
gonna pull out of the form submission
because that is what it is called.
So we get the amount and then we also
have the deposit date formatted.
So this is actually what our loader will
send back for each one of these deposits.
So what we're actually
submitting is the deposit date
which is going to actually be stringified
to I think it's Y, Y, Y, M, M, D, D.
So year, month, day,
that's how it's serialized with the way
the browser submits and everything.
So we actually need to parse that and
format it in the way that we display it.
So that's what we're going to do, but
it's gonna be called the deposit date.
And I mentioned also that when
we send back in our loader,
we send back the deposit date formatted.
We're just using to local date string.
In any legitimate application,
you're probably going to want to have a
date formatting library in everything too.
So that is deposit date formatted,
so we're going to get
the date out of new deposit,
yeah, thank you for that Copilot.
So we're gonna get it out of the form
data, but again we need to format this and
we have a handy parse date and
then we can use to locale date string.
So when you take converted to
a dot date object via parse
date which is a utility that we
have that we can just import.
Pass that along and
then call to locale date string.
This actually, it may work differently
on your machine because your to locale
date string could be different
based on your locale.
And so that's why you probably
wanna have a date formatting
library as part of your application.
So in any case, we're getting some errors
here because TypeScript isn't super jazzed
about the fact that this can be
a form data entry value or null, and
we're passing that to parse date.
And yeah, the same thing for
the amount, actually, but
I'm gonna leave that for later.
We just wanna make sure
that this thing works.
This will probably work as expected, but
TypeScript is just helping us think about
those cases that could absolutely happen.
I tweeted a while ago that TypeScript
isn't making your life miserable,
it's just showing you how
miserable your life actually is.
So that is what TypeScript is doing for
us.
We'll take care of this here in a second.
What I want to do is just make sure
that this optimistic UI piece is
actually working, so
that we can deal with it if it's not.
Okay, so we'll go slow 3G I give
it an amount of 25 bucks and
that was today and here's your 25.
I hit Create, we're on a slow 3G network
so this should show up instantly which
it does, that works great,
and so we're in a good spot.
And when revalidation happens,
all of that optimistic UI or
the optimistic data deposit
that we just created,
that actually is gone now because
the submission no longer exists.
And so this if statement will not happen
because there's no longer a submission.
And now data deposits actually
includes the real deposit,
and if I hover over this you can see
the link to the specific deposit.
If I submit this again and then I hover
over quickly, you'll see it actually links
to slash new, which is the problem
that I described earlier.
But when revalidation happens,
then it gets updated to the correct URL.
Okay, so next we're gonna do a little bit
of work to make TypeScript happier about
this and just kind of talk about
how to deal with some of that,
as well as actually do
a little validation too.
>> If the client ID matches one
that's already in the deposits array,
could we avoid submitting another deposit
to prevent accidental double deposit for
instance?
>> Yeah, so I don't know how
you could possibly set this ID,
that optimistic ID, to something that
already exists in the deposits array.
That would be like these IDs are nuts, so
I'm not sure that is a practical problem.
I might be misunderstanding
the question though.
In general,
I don't think that this is going to
surface as an actual issue for people.
And we'll just focus on this last bit,
which is resetting the form when
the submission is finished.
So we're going to use
a use effect from React.
We're not going to use the plus symbol.
We're gonna type correctly.
We're gonna add our dependency array.
And now what I need to do is nope,
nope, you know what, I'm gonna disable
Copilot because as awesome as it
is sometimes it's not awesome.
So what I need to do is first I
need to add a ref to the form so
I can reset the form.
So let's do that first here
got my deposit form ref.
We'll just call it the form ref wherein
the deposits components is gonna be,
our deposit form of course.
Use ref, that is used reducer, not what
I wanted to type, use ref, there we go.
And set that to know initially, we're
gonna make this an HTML form element.
And then down here on my HTML form
element I'll say ref equals my form ref,
and then I'll first just do a little thing
that I often do in these types of things.
If there's not a form ref dot current,
then I'm gonna return.
So what that does for me is now form
ref dot current totally exists and
I don't have to do any more null
checking and whatever, so that's nice.
The next thing that I wanna do is,
ultimately what I'm trying to
accomplish here is form ref
dot reset current dot reset.
And that will reset the form to its
original state to all of its default
values and things.
But I only want to do that when
the new deposit fetcher state is idle,
so when the submission is finished
then we wanna reset the form.
We don't wanna do that in any other
rerender like as users typing or
anything else, we don't wanna do that.
So we'll say if it's not idle,
then we'll return,
you can write that however you'd like.
And then I'll let Dan Abramoff
fill that in for me.
Thank you, Dan.
Cool, so now if I come back over here and
we wait for
this slow three gen network to
load the app, and we say 45,
45, and we get the automatic or
that optimistic UI.
And when revalidation is all finished,
then that gets reset for us.
Next exercise we'll talk about
focusing back on the right field and
stuff like that.
Okay, great.
So now the last thing is just
to make TypeScript happy, and
actually we're gonna do some
handy dandy validation as well.
Before we do that, I'm gonna say what
if I set this is missing an amount.
So we're gonna skip the amount and
hit Create.
Well thank you browser for that.
What if I change that to say no validate?
What do you think about that browser?
Boom, okay, so
we're gonna get zero over there.
And that will roll back actually
because that is an error.
And if we go to our network and look at
that post request, we are going to get in
our response this error,
it says amount must be greater than zero.
And the deposit date didn't have an error,
so we're fine there.
So in that case, we can actually get
that error out of the submission or
the fetcher dot data that will have
it there and we could display that,
we're not gonna do that right now.
But what I want to note is the fact
that it rolled back for us.
So user submitted something, our optimism
was misplaced, that optimistic UI is gone,
and we didn't code anything that
thought about that even a little bit.
So that's neat.
That bug is is not a problem for
us, which I think is cool.
We can hit Create and right because
they're all new, so if I generated the ID
you could actually hit Create a bunch of
times and the right thing will happen.
It will say all of these optimistic
UI things should go away and
they will not ultimately be created.
So that's cool.
So let's just make TypeScript happy here,
and
then we can move on to the next exercise.
So for our amount, TypeScript is
angry about this because this returns
a form data entry value or null.
So what I'm gonna do here
is we'll say form amount,
and now I'll just say
if the type form amount
is equal to a number and
then we'll do this,
and now Typescript's happy about that.
For this piece, we'll
say this is our deposit or
form deposit date.
And we can say,
let's actually put that up here and
the type of this is equal to a string.
And actually you know what, it just occurs
to me, this will never be a number,
it's either a form data entry value or
a string.
So this is going to be a string.
I'm going to say we'll numberfy
this thing, number, there.
So now this is going to be of type number.
It could be num potentially, so like you
could add a bunch of extra checks here,
but I think you get the idea.
You're just doing a little bit of
validation before you do optimistic UI.
Same thing for our form deposit date,
we're just gonna check that it's a string.
You could also make sure that parse date
results in an actual validate and all
of that, but hopefully you get the idea,
you can do all sorts of validation before,
that's all client side validation before
actually doing the optimistic UI.
Because it's doesn't make any sense
to actually send the request and show
the optimistic UI if you know for certain
that this is not going to work anyway.
Additionally, what's really neat about
this is you can actually use the same
validation logic that
we're using in our action.
So you could literally just say,
hey, validate my amount and
don't show optimistic UI if
this validation is gonna fail.
Because I know it's going to fail,
why show that optimism?
Same thing for our deposit date,
and so we could do all that,
I think you get the idea so
I'm not gonna bother.
It would all just go as part of the if
statements that we have before we
actually add an item to the deposits.